This race
lives in the blood--
blood, blood...
decade to decade...
century to century...
past to future...
father to son...
chasing the same dream,
always chasing.
Le Mans is a car race
like no other.
It's an endurance test
for drivers and cars
that literally takes
24 hours to complete.
55 cars will start,
but many fewer will reach
the checkered flag.
With unprecedented access
to six of the teams
and the event itself,
this is the story of a race
that pushes technology
to the limit
but where the ghosts of the past
are never far from the present.
Well, it's been
a blistering start to the race,
and at the front of the grid,
Timo Bernhard in
the number 17 Porsche
already trying
to stretch his lead.
In third place, reigning
champion Andre Lotterer's Audi
is about eight seconds
off the leader.
We are at the moment, really,
six cars hunting for the lead
or even starting
to hunt for the lead.
We are for sure that two Toyotas
following us at
a very short distance,
so there's really
eight cars in the game.
And down in sixth place,
Sebastien Buemi
in the Toyota number 1.
Sebastien, of course,
comes from a racing family.
His grandfather Georges
raced here 55 years ago.
Voilà.
15 minutes into the race.
The 23 Nissan
of Jann Mardenborough
is still stuck in the pits.
Are you hearing me okay?
Yeah, I can hear you.
So Mardenborough
now has the engine
running again.
Rolling forward, forward,
forward, forward, forward,
forward, forward-- need
to get-- second gear is off.
It's the 55th car into the race.
Excellent. So we do
have the full complement.
Jann Mardenborough, not
originally a racing driver,
started on his sofa
in front of the PlayStation.
It's painful for me.
I'm a racer, and, uh,
and to just do this--
just to test
effectively in public
and not be fast is painful.
I couldn't stay on the grid.
To be that far back
is just painful for me.
So I went under a bridge--
like some troll, maybe--
and I phoned
all of my family members
and just said,
"We're doing our best.
We'll see what happens
at the end of the race."
He's not
going to be happy where he is.
But he will have his own
personal challenge now.
- Yeah.
- He'll be looking
for better time.
He'll be looking to try
and better the previous lap
and just claw the time back.
It's a new car, things happen,
so we just gotta
get on with it, really.
It is what it is.
He's not a second place man.
He's not a third place man.
He doesn't like
anything below first.
I am the gamer.
I did come from games.
It's just a cool feeling to have
that you're now recognized
as a professional driver.
This is where I am.
This is where I belong.
I think in a long time,
there'll be a moment
when something will happen,
and it will be magical,
so starting from the back,
if we can get all the way
to the top wherever,
uh, that will be
some story, won't it?
One hour into this race,
and it's Porsche 1 and 2,
but only a second behind
is the number 7 Audi.
Okay, Timo...
What a dog fight this is
between the two teams.
You have to wonder
just how critical
the different technologies
each are using
are going to be.
So Audi have a diesel engine,
turbo charged, powering
the back wheels directly.
The electric motors
drive the front wheels.
It's the same basic technology
as they used last year,
but they've updated the engine
and the hybrid system,
and that's a serious
increase in power.
We have an improved engine
which gets more power
out of less consumption.
We've doubled
the amount of energy
that we can boost
on the front axle
on the electric side.
The Audi is using
2 1/2% less diesel
per lap than last year,
but they're still going quicker.
Amazing efficiency.
Porsche's engine is
also behind the driver,
but they're using a little
4-cylinder petrol engine.
Porsche's major difference comes
from how the electric hybrid
on the front wheels are driven.
Their rivals use
a conventional method
of recovering kinetic
energy under braking,
but Porsche is showcasing
new technology here
that uses thermal energy
from the spent exhaust gases
from its turbo chargers.
This means they can
harvest while accelerating
and gives them
a little advantage
in straight-line speed,
but the Audi R18 is still
quick around the corners.
Teams with deep pockets--
Porsche, Audi, Toyota--
of coursethey're out in front,
but the privately run
Rebellion team,
with a budget maybe
a fifth of the big teams,
are hanging on
to the leaders' coattails,
their two cars in 9th
and 10th position.
It's an amazing achievement,
considering they didn't
even have a car
five weeks ago.
Is it this one? That's
got the oil tank crack.
A privateer team
doesn't have the support
of a manufacturer.
Rebellion are a team
that's born out
of a passion to go racing,
particularly at Le Mans,
and not being afraid
of stepping up
and pitching ourselves
against the guys
that have the huge budgets.
Our reason for existing
is more for going racing
rather than trying to sell cars.
Yeah, he's not a Monaco man.
He has a pick of saloons.
Then he's coming back
a career man.
Yeah.
It started off
as a kind of a hobby
business for my father.
He took early retirement,
and he needed something
to keep him occupied.
It was actually
the day of our wedding
when Bart's dad came to us.
I think it was
the end of the day.
We were in the bar
and it was like,
"Oh, you know,
he'd had a few drinks."
He had an idea.
Does that remind you
of anything?
"We're gonna buy a racing car,
"and we're going to race
at Le Mans,
and we're going to win."
After
a period of time in the UK,
we stepped up into
international motor sport
and started to race in America
and then in the European series,
which was around 2001.
Unfortunately, Dad died in 2010.
He actually had a heart attack
as he was doing karting.
My way of dealing
with that loss
was to throw myself
completely at the sport.
Part of me, I guess,
has had this feeling
of wanting to make sure
that I lived up
to his expectation.
Well,
what a result for Rebellion.
They've been coming here
for a few years now,
and their number 12 car
comes across
in fourth position--
their best-ever finish.
Fourth place
overall in 2014
was really the reward for
that faith and that belief.
That led to us wanting
to change the engine
to try and strive to be
ever more competitive.
Dad was never satisfied with
near enough is good enough.
He might be saying
if he was sat here,
"You might be pleased
with fourth, son,
but that's not
good enough for me."
Our goal, really, is to try
and win the race
as a private team.
Success at Le Mans
is really key each year
for us to keep things alive.
Oh, big trouble
for one of the factory
GT Porsches
at the first chicane
after an incident
with another car.
Looks to be--
it's the 13 Rebellion.
Patrick Pilet is out of that
works 991 specification car.
So the GT car spins out.
The Rebellion is
stuck in the gravel.
That's a big blow
for Bart and the team.
There's an element
of "Oh, shit."
Your first thought
is just to assess
the driver's situation.
Is he okay? Is he hurt?
We're hearing they are going
to try and get that car
at the garage
under its own power,
just trying to keep it
in the race.
The good news is that Alex
Imperatori in the Rebellion
made it out in one piece.
As for the car, well,
they've managed to get
the engine started,
but it won't be
until Bart and the team
have a chance to look at it
and assess the damage
that they know
they can patch it up
and get it back in the race.
Oh, crikey,
we've now got
another three quarters
of the race to run.
A lot of catching up to do
now for that Rebellion.
At the front of the field,
the pace is relentless.
Over 20 laps completed,
no let-up.
Porsche first and second,
just about holding off
the Audis.
It's really a question now
of who's going to blink first.
Oh, my goodness, that's
absolutely fantastic
from Andre Lotterer,
going up the outside of
the black Porsche number 18
and into second place.
And now what a guy!
He's snapping at the heels
of leader Timo Bernhard.
Look at that Audi go!
It looks like he's hit
the after-furnace.
Totally audacious
from Andre Lotterer.
He's snatched it away
from both of the Porsches.
An Audi lead Le Mans.
Okay, it's early in the race.
This is just one hour
into the race, but it's on.
I knew it was going
to start a dogfight.
You think, Okay, how much
do I push actually?
Because I know it's 23--
something hours to go.
Do I really go 100%,
or is it okay to go 99.5?
I don't even think so much
about the competition.
Something can always happen,
a human error
or something on the track
giving you a puncture.
You just have to go
through the race
as fast as you can
without any mistakes.
Big move by Audi.
I wonder what kind of response
we'll see from Toyota.
A long way from the medals--
Jann Mardenborough's Nissan.
In fairness, the 23 car is
making some progress now,
up to 40th position overall,
but they will need
a major setback
from the teams ahead of them
if they've got any hope
of reaching the top 10.
Back at the front,
it's a real tussle
between Porsche and Audi.
This could go down in history
alongside the great battle
between Ford and Ferrari
in the 1960s.
Ferrari's impressive domination
of the 24-hour
since World War II
had attracted the amorous
glances of one Henry Ford,
who set out to buy
the Italian manufacturer
but was personally rebuffed
by its founder Enzo Ferrari.
Not a man to take
a slight lightly,
Ford planned
his revenge in 1966.
He bought the Ford
GT40 to Le Mans
in a bid to overturn
Ferrari's straight run
of five consecutive victories.
Throwing everything at the race
in his determination,
Ferrari simply couldn't match
the pace of Ford's car.
And over the next few years,
the Americans
dominated this course.
But of course the rivalry today
is more sporting than personal,
and here it looks like
we're gonna see Porsche
make a tactical switch
in an attempt to wrestle
back that lead.
There's always a few
butterflies in the stomach,
getting myself psyched up,
but knowing that I need
to be pretty calm as well.
Outside of the cockpit,
yeah, the mind starts to wander.
Probably I'm a bit young.
Still haven't done
enough endurance races
to be calm and just
completely switch off.
We're all nervous.
No one wants to be the one
to make a mistake.
Timo Bernhard out
and Brendon Hartley
into the Porsche 17.
When I take off
down that pit lane,
the adrenaline kicks in.
I'm in my little world,
and it's just pure focus
on the job at hand.
It's gonna be interesting to see
how young Brendon Hartley
tries to wind in the lead
of the champion Lotterer.
Oh, Lotterer
into the pit lane early.
Must be some kind of problem.
He drove over debris
from another car's accident.
That's an extra
tire change for Audi,
an extra minute in the pits.
And, in a race this close,
that's going to cost them.
The 7 Audi came in.
The body language
from the crew--
they know that this is a race
not just out on the track.
Absolute tenths
of secondsto be gained
from every single pit stop.
Strap yourselves in,
boys and girls.
So Porsche,
with Brendon Hartley
at the wheel
in the 17 car
he shares with Mark Webber,
are back in the lead,
And for Audi, they'll
need to see some pressure
applied by their second
car, the number 8.
Oh, my goodness! Horrific!
Problems all over
the place for Audi!
Audi had been hit
by a few problems.
Well, it's the moment
we've all been waiting for.
Mark Webber is getting ready
to get into
the Porsche number 17.
Being
in the car at night,
it's an incredible experience
for the driver in the cockpit.
It doesn't happen
in any other race.
Patrick Morisseau: